The Standard Model of particle physics is the theory describing three of the four known fundamental forces (the electromagnetic, weak, and strong interactions) and classifying all known elementary particles.
An electron is a subatomic particle with a negative one elementary electric charge. It belongs to the first generation of the lepton particle family, and is generally thought to be an elementary particle because it has no known components or substructure.
A proton is a stable subatomic particle, symbol p, H+, or 1H with a positive electric charge of +1 e. Protons are present in atomic nuclei, and each atom has at least one proton.
A neutron is a subatomic particle, symbol n or n0, which has a neutral (not positive or negative) charge, and a mass slightly greater than that of a proton.
Quarks are a type of elementary particle and a fundamental constituent of matter. Quarks combine to form composite particles called hadrons, the most stable of which are protons and neutrons, the components of atomic nuclei.
There are six types, known as flavors, of quarks: up, down, strange, charm, bottom, and top.
The up and down quarks have the lowest masses of all quarks. The heavier quarks rapidly change into up and down quarks through a process of particle decay.
Leptons are elementary particles of half-integer spin that do not undergo strong interactions. The best known of all leptons is the electron.
There are six types of leptons: the electron, the muon, and the tau particle, along with their associated neutrinos (electron neutrino, muon neutrino, and tau neutrino).
The Higgs boson is an elementary particle in the Standard Model of particle physics, produced by the quantum excitation of the Higgs field, one of the fields in particle physics theory.
The Higgs field is responsible for giving mass to fundamental particles like electrons and quarks.
The photon is an elementary particle that is a quantum of the electromagnetic field, including electromagnetic radiation such as light and radio waves, and the force carrier for the electromagnetic force.
Gluons are elementary particles that act as the exchange particles (or gauge bosons) for the strong force between quarks.
The W and Z bosons are together known as the weak bosons or more generally as the intermediate vector bosons. These elementary particles mediate the weak interaction.
Antimatter is material composed of the antiparticles of the corresponding particles of ordinary matter.
A positron is the antiparticle or the antimatter counterpart of the electron. It has an electric charge of +1 e and has the same mass as an electron.
When a particle collides with its antiparticle, the two annihilate each other, with their mass being entirely converted into energy in the form of photons.
Neutrinos are fermions (particles with half-integer spin) that interact only via the weak subatomic force and gravity. They are electrically neutral and have a rest mass that is so small that it was long thought to be zero.
Muons are elementary particles similar to the electron, with an electric charge of -1 e and a spin of 1/2, but with a much greater mass.
The strong interaction, or strong nuclear force, is the fundamental interaction that confines quarks into proton, neutron, and other hadron particles.
The weak interaction, or weak nuclear force, is the mechanism of interaction between subatomic particles that is responsible for the radioactive decay of atoms.
Quantum electrodynamics (QED) is the relativistic quantum field theory of electrodynamics. It describes how light and matter interact.
Quantum chromodynamics (QCD) is the theory of the strong interaction between quarks and gluons, the fundamental particles that make up composite hadrons such as the proton, neutron and pion.
A fermion is a particle that follows Fermi-Dirac statistics. Fermions include all quarks and leptons, as well as all composite particles made of an odd number of these, such as all baryons and many atoms and nuclei.
A boson is a particle that follows Bose-Einstein statistics. Bosons include all gauge bosons (photon, gluons, W and Z bosons), the Higgs boson, and all composite particles made of an even number of fermions, such as mesons.
Dark matter is a hypothetical form of matter thought to account for approximately 85% of the matter in the universe. It does not interact with the electromagnetic field, meaning it does not absorb, reflect, or emit light.
Dark energy is an unknown form of energy that affects the universe on the largest scales. It is the primary accepted hypothesis to explain the observation that the universe is expanding at an accelerating rate.
The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is the world's largest and highest-energy particle collider, built by CERN. It lies in a tunnel 27 kilometres in circumference.
CERN is the European Organization for Nuclear Research, one of the world's largest and most respected centres for scientific research.
Particle accelerators are machines that propel charged particles, such as protons or electrons, at high speeds, close to the speed of light.
Cosmic rays are high-energy protons and atomic nuclei that move through space at nearly the speed of light.
Feynman diagrams are pictorial representations of the mathematical expressions describing the behavior and interaction of subatomic particles.
String theory is a theoretical framework in which the point-like particles of particle physics are replaced by one-dimensional objects called strings.
Supersymmetry (SUSY) is a conjectured relationship between two basic classes of elementary particles: bosons, which have an integer-valued spin, and fermions, which have a half-integer spin.
A tachyon is a hypothetical particle that always travels faster than light.
The graviton is a hypothetical elementary particle that mediates the force of gravitation in the framework of quantum field theory.
Gravity is the weakest of the four fundamental forces of nature. It is described by Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity.
Mass-energy equivalence is the principle that anything having mass has an equivalent amount of energy and vice versa, expressed by the formula E = mc^2.
Alpha particles consist of two protons and two neutrons bound together into a particle identical to a helium-4 nucleus.
Beta particles are high-energy, high-speed electrons or positrons emitted by certain types of radioactive nuclei.
Gamma rays are penetrating form of electromagnetic radiation arising from the radioactive decay of atomic nuclei.
A plasma is a state of matter consisting of a gas of ions and free electrons.
The Pauli exclusion principle is the quantum mechanical principle which states that two or more identical fermions cannot occupy the same quantum state within a quantum system simultaneously.
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle states that there is a fundamental limit to the precision with which certain pairs of physical properties of a particle, such as position and momentum, can be known.
A meson is a hadronic subatomic particle composed of one quark and one antiquark, bound together by strong interactions.
A baryon is a type of composite subatomic particle that contains an odd number of valence quarks (at least 3). Protons and neutrons are the most well-known baryons.
Hadron therapy is a type of radiation therapy that uses beams of protons or other ions to treat cancer.
Cherenkov radiation is electromagnetic radiation emitted when a charged particle passes through a dielectric medium at a speed greater than the phase velocity of light in that medium.
A neutrino detector is a physics apparatus designed to study neutrinos. Because neutrinos only weakly interact with other particles of matter, neutrino detectors must be very large.
The theory of everything (TOE) is a hypothetical, single, all-encompassing, coherent theoretical framework of physics that fully explains and links together all physical aspects of the universe.The Rutherford model is a model of the atom proposed by Ernest Rutherford in 1911, describing the atom as a tiny, dense, positively charged core called a nucleus, in which nearly all the mass is concentrated, around which the light, negative constituents, called electrons, circulate at some distance, much like planets revolving around the Sun.
